design: MetalLB CRD controller enhancement (#833)
metallb/metallb: design/0001-metallb-crd.md

server level, no support for API versioning and no fine-grained permission
model via RBAC.
Custom resource definition "CRD" are managed like any other resource,
through the Kubernetes API, and eventually stored in the backend store Etcd.

### Goals

- Configuring MetalLB using kubernetes custom resource "CRD".
- Retain support of the existing ConfigMap interface for backwards
  compatibility.

## Proposal

Using [Kubebuilder](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder)
framework to build new CRD "MetalLB" object and a controller which works as
a translator from the user's configuration yaml to a MetalLB's configmap
object, with this approach there will be no changes required for the
MetalLB management plane.

### Risks and Mitigations

Users need to either use CRD or ConfigMap to configure MetalLB
but not both, if adminstrator mistakenly uses both, the CRD configuration will
overwrite the user defined ConfigMap.

## Design Details

### Design Overview

[Metallb CRD Design diagram](https://excalidraw.com/#json=5898667890311168,GWkLmmW6WMvZu6JdisIT0Q)

![Metallb CRD Design diagram](./metallb-crd.png)

This proposal will implement three custom resource objects :-

> - [AddressPools](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/850/files#diff-e700ddc5833f14f3e89d361ddfc1b1965022f7f15a5fc46dcdba3185f8cafe7b)

Author: I disagree it make sense ti group all pools under list object and u still can update specific pool and leave other unchanged if we created resource for every pool/peer entries will endup with large number of resources which will make it hard to maange

> - [AddressPools](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/850/files#diff-e700ddc5833f14f3e89d361ddfc1b1965022f7f15a5fc46dcdba3185f8cafe7b)

Reviewer: I'm not sure why individual resources would be harder to manage than one big resource. Care to explain?

As a matter of fact, we can argue the opposite: With one big resource, modifying e.g. one BGP peer would require iterating through an array of peers. With individual resources, you access just the relevant resource by name.

It doesn't make sense to me to manage multiple BGP peers in a single resource just as it doesn't make sense to me to do so for `Service` or `Deployment` objects.

Lastly, you've mentioned fine-grained RBAC as a motivation for the proposal. How would you grant a user, say, access to peer X but not to peer Y if all peers are under one resource?

> - [AddressPools](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/850/files#diff-e700ddc5833f14f3e89d361ddfc1b1965022f7f15a5fc46dcdba3185f8cafe7b)

Reviewer 2: If we can have multiple AddressPools this is the best of both worlds IMO, example I create an AddressPools for application X that need IPs in 2 different ranges (management and public). For sure having only 1 global AddressPools I need to get / modify / apply and we are no better than the configmap.

> - [AddressPools](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/850/files#diff-e700ddc5833f14f3e89d361ddfc1b1965022f7f15a5fc46dcdba3185f8cafe7b)

Author: all valid points I will divide even further

- [Peers](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/850/files#diff-e700ddc5833f14f3e89d361ddfc1b1965022f7f15a5fc46dcdba3185f8cafe7b)

- [BgpCommunities](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/850/files#diff-8f9cdf24a9af2238173c872bb20e3a18aa02bbea9908817d29dcdf1283f7fd60)

### Configuration Flow

1. User will supply the yaml configuration, here is a
   [sample config](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/850/files#diff-18cb180f903e44677f91d9eb946d3cf7230ca48ff708f145722b09031bcfe54a).
1. Configuration will get authenticated and authorized based on RBAC rules.
1. Supplied configuration will get verified using openAPIV3Schema based on
   the definition of CRDs.
1. New objects will be stored in etcd.
1. Based on the supplied configuration, All the controllers monitor API server looking for creation of
   AddressPools/Peers/BgpCommunities resource.
1. The CRD's controller will use golang based template to convert the configuration object to
   its crossponding part of the final ConfigMap object.
1. The generated ConfigMap object will be written to etcd so MetalLB's
   components can consume it as if the adminstrator directly used ConfigMap.

> ### CRD Extendability

Reviewer: This needs more work. Being able to extend CRDs isn't the issue here. We are talking about finding a good data model which can be flexible enough for the currently-known use cases and hopefully some future ones, too.

In other words, it's not enough to say "we can add field X to resource Y", we need to actually figure out if it **makes sense** to do.

For example, consider the following two use cases. They might look identical but they aren't.

1. Announce pool P1 only from node group N1. Do not announce pool P1 from any other node groups.
  - Node group N1 may also announce pool P2.
  - Pool P1 may NOT be announced by node group N2.
2. Announce only pool P1 from node group N1. Do not announce any other pools from group N1.
  - Node group N1 may NOT announce pool P2.
  - Pool P1 may be announced by node group N2.

Given the above, what should we do? Add a node/peer selector to pools? Add a pool selector to peers/nodes? Do both? How do the two knobs interact? Have we thought about side effects?

The above is just a **sample** problem. I'm sure there are more we haven't considered. For example, what about cases where node N peers with routers R1 and R2 and wants to advertise a prefix to R1 but not to R2?

I feel like we need to dedicate more thought to this and discuss such topics in the proposal. As discussed before, **flexibility is a major concern** when touching the config surface. It would be a mistake to add some fields to the CRDs just to get the CRD PR out the door. We need to see that we are _actually_ solving existing problems and aren't introducing new ones. I'm aware we can't foresee everything but we can still think about cases that are already known to us e.g. from open issues.

Author: it sounded like you are looking for Node pool announcement ACL conifg with implicit deny something like, assuimg we use
Ids for pool assignments :- 

nodeSelectorGroup: ng1
  node1
  node2

nodeSelectorGroup: ng2
  node3

nodeSelectorGroup ng1:
   Accept: Pool >= Pool1 && Pool < Pool10  // range [1:10]

nodeSelectorGroup ng2:
    Accept:  Pool != Pool1

which another object abd can be extended to Peers too

Reviewer 3: Maybe we could add a commit(s) to this PR to help understand how we would use the CRD and what it would look like. I don't think we will be able to cover every use case but it would at least give us (increasing) confidence on the structure. For example, we could include the following:

1. List of sample uses cases: I don't think each needs to be very detailed (perhaps a single line for each like the example @johananl specified above `Announce pool P1 only from node group N1. Do not announce pool P1 from any other node groups.`). @msherif1234 maybe you can start this? You could use the unit tests for inspiration and then you could get feedback from the rest of the community on them.

2. The proposed CRD or CRDs

3. Examples of how the CRD(s) from (2) could be used to address the use cases in (1). This could show object definitions, for example.

I think if we don't approach it in a structured way, we may miss some corner cases.

Reviewer 3: On a separate point, I think it would be good to outline some kind of plan for how we would version this API? Also, how (and if) it should align to MetalLB releases.

Author: @markdgray I have been thinking about nodeselector option today its under Peers conifg I think if needs to move up in the level so it can work for both addresspools and peers I will share what I have once its ready

Reviewer 4: just that it seems more like an attirbute than an independent object to me, and also seems more consistent with other places the selector pattern exists

Custom resource definition "CRD" are managed like any other resource,
through the Kubernetes API, and eventually stored in the backend store Etcd.

### Goals

- Configuring MetalLB using kubernetes custom resource "CRD".
- Retain support of the existing ConfigMap interface for backwards
  compatibility.

## Proposal

Using [Kubebuilder](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder)
framework to build new CRDs "MetalLB" objects and a controllers which will construct
Metallb's Config objects, the Metallb Controller will watch those objects and use
them to configure Metallb.

### Risks and Mitigations

Users need to either use CRD or ConfigMap to configure MetalLB
but not both, if adminstrator mistakenly uses both, the CRD configuration will
overwrite the user defined ConfigMap.

## Design Details

### Design Overview

[Metallb CRD Design diagram](https://excalidraw.com/#json=5697710665498624,2uxfWYNvvkI6IqP-VEaQng)

![Metallb CRD Design diagram](./metallb-crd.png)

This proposal will implement the following CRD objects :-

- Node selectors CRD which is a general objects to specify the node(s) of interest

```
node-selectors:
    - match-labels:
    - match-expressions:
```    

> - Protocol can now be layer2 or bgp but with FRR capability we can add ospf/is-is and other protocols

Reviewer 5: should the operator support different protocols on different nodes?

Author: we have node selector to segment your cluster , but my understanding today customers uses Metallb either in L2 or BGP but not both, others pls. correct me here if I am wrong.

```
protocol:
```

- Address pools object (existing object w/o protocol and bgp advertisments)

```
address-pools:
    - name:
      addresses:
      auto-assign:
      avoid-buggy-ips:

> ```

Author: oh I meant to have singular as it been ask b4 and I still have it (s) I will update it , but yes the plan to have one instance for each CRD, sorry for that

- BGP peers object (today object w/o node selector)

```
peers:
    - peer-address:  // we can make it also subnet if we decide to support dynamic neighbors ?
     peer-asn:
     my-asn:
```

- BGP communities object

```
bgp-communities:
   no-advertise: 

> ```

Reviewer 4: Right, but `bgp-communities` just defines aliases that you can then refer to under `bgp-advertisements.communities`.  It's the same info, just a place to define aliases off to the side.

I was thinking that if we just had another way to give the numbers a friendly name, the alias definitions off to the side aren't really required.

- BGP advertisements object *used to be part of address pools)

```
bgp-advertisements:
      - aggregation-length: 
        localpref: 
        communities:
        - no-advertise

> ```

Author: sure this one way but the concern @johananl might have is having big CRD , in what I have if we have OSPF for example or anything else we will have new CRD 
```
ospf-neighbour:
 -
```
so no impact to already defined CRDs for address pool we just need to another value to protocol enum and then create new CRD or CRDs  that is/are protocol specific

> ```

Reviewer 4: Somehow these BGP advertisement options must be associated with an address pool.  Can you describe an alternative for how you'd have them tied together?

> ```

Reviewer 3: Would we want to use the same BGPAdvertisement for multiple AddressPools? i.e. have a default one.

> ```

Author: the way its used todaay its tied up to address-pool definition but your question is valid maybe it doesn't haeve to be 1:1 relationship @johananl can you share ur thoughts here ?

### Configuration Flow

1. User will supply the yaml configuration
1. Configuration will get authenticated and authorized based on RBAC rules.

> 1. Supplied configuration will get verified using openAPIV3Schema based on

Reviewer 5: are all the validations are simple and can be handle by the crd-validation?

for example duplicate IP pools, duplicate `asn` between the `peers` and `my` etc..

The upgrade webhook is also important, will you be able to add a note about that on this PR?

> # MetalLB Custom Resource Controller 

Reviewer 3: It would be good to see a proposed CRD as part of this design.

Author: u want to share the CRD definition or sample config , sample config is already shared in the testing section

Reviewer 3: It might be good to propose an initial CRD (rather than a sample) here to get an early review as this is a key part of the design. It may save you rework at a later stage.

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
- [Testing](#testing)
- [Debugging and Troubleshooting](#debugging-and-troubleshooting)

> <!-- /toc -->

Reviewer 3: I didn't include the TOC in my enhancement.

This is a question for the maintainers. We should probably decide on a template rather than loosely basing on KE template otherwise every enhancement will look different.

Reviewer 4: ha, I'm OK with including a template.  I'm also just happy to have people working on this type of doc, even if they all look different.  :)

> ## Summary

Reviewer 3: This reads more like a motivation than a summary. Perhaps move this to the "Motivation" section and create a summary describing the proposed changes.

> Today MetalLB allows only configuration of layer2 and BGP protocols using Configmap objects, 

Reviewer 3: ConfigMap

which is simple from configuration perspective and doesn't require cluster-admin rights,
however it doesn't have validation on the API server level, no support for API versioning and 
no fine-grained permission model via RBAC.

## Motivation
Custom resource definition "CRD" takes advantage of kubernetes extensibility to deliver the automation advantages of cloud services like 
provisioning, scaling and backup/restore.

### Goals

> Configuring MetalLB layer2 and BGP using kubernetes custom resource "CRD" instead of ConfigMap.

Reviewer 3: Are there any other goals/non-goals? 
* Do we have any goals regarding stability of the CRD?
* I presume that we intend to expose all current ConfigMap configuration via the CRD?

Author: using k8s CRD enable us to support versioning to help with version upgrades , so that support is built in CRD using Conversion web hook.

## Proposal
Using SIG's [Kubebuilder](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder) framework to build new CRD "MetalLB" object 

> and a controller which works as a translator from the user's configuration yaml to a MetalLB's configmap object.

Reviewer 3: Why would we continue to use the intermediate ConfigMap?

Author: the controller convert the CRD configs to configmap intentionally to avoid chaning Metallb provisiong logic with that approach we have no risk at all if users wanted to continue with configmap

Reviewer 3: Looks like @russellb agrees and this should be an alternative configuration method.

with this approach there will be no changes required for the MetalLB management plane.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 3: There is no automatic markdown linting in this repo yet. Perhaps pass this through a linter to resolve any issues that may pop up. For example, I think there should be new lines after title sections.

Users need to either use CRD or ConfigMap to provision load balancer instance but not both, if user
mistakenly used both the CRD configuration will overwrite the user defined ConfigMap.

## Design Details

> ![Alt text](./metallb_crd.png?raw=true "MetalLB Kubernetes Controller")

Reviewer 3: I have a preference for something like an ASCII diagram (e.g. https://asciiflow.com/ ) instead because it doesn't add a lot of bytes to the repo, it is easier to review and it can be easily updated after merging (even if you don't have the original source). Maybe other reviewers have other ideas about tooling/approached for this.

Author: this graph I did using draw.io if there is agreement on tool I will migrate to it

Reviewer: Another idea is https://excalidraw.com/ which allows generating nice-looking diagrams and exporting PNG with the diagram's "source" embedded in the PNG metadata, allowing you to magically edit a diagram by opening the PNG file in Excalidraw.

> 1- User will supply the yaml configuration using the MetalLB resource.

Reviewer 3: nit: Maybe you could use a Github markdown ordered list here?

> 2- Configuration will get authenticated and  authorized based on RBAC rules customized by SIG's framework 

Reviewer 3: nit: double space between "and" and "authorized"

(it can be further tunned as needed).

3- Supplied configuration will get verified using openAPIV3Schema based on the definition of MetalLB CRD.

4- New objects will be stored in etcd.

5- MetalLB controller monitors API server looking for creation of MetalLB resource.

6- MetalLB controller will use golang based template to convert the configured MetalLB object to ConfigMap object.

7- The generated configmap object will be written to etcd so MetalLB's components can consume it as if the user directly 

> supplied Configmap configuration.

Reviewer 3: ConfigMap

## Testing
- Manual validation/PoC using KIND cluster
  - bring up multi node cluster.
  - deploy metalLB controller and speakers PODs.
  - deploy MetalLB CRD controller.
  - apply MetalLB resource config using the following sample configuration.
    ```bigquery
    apiVersion: loadbalancer.loadbalancer.operator.io/v1
    kind: MetalLB
    metadata:
      name: metallb-sample
      namespace: metallb-system
    spec:
      address-pools:
      - name: default
        protocol: layer2
        addresses:
        - 172.18.255.100-172.18.255.200
    ```
  - deploy load balancer service application for example NGINX.

>   - verify traffic to the NGINX service.

Reviewer 3: Are there any standard Kubernetes e2e tests we could use?

Author: not that I am aware of, I am planning to extend existing Metallb e2e test to include MetalLB resource.

Reviewer 3: I dont think there is a MetalLB e2e test as it was dropped recently.

>     ```bigquery

Reviewer 3: I don't think you need "bigquery" here as this is not a "bigquery" code block.

    kubectl create deploy nginx --image nginx
    
    kubectl expose deploy nginx --port 80 --type LoadBalancer
    
    kubectl get services
    
    You'll get out put similar to the following:
    
    NAME         TYPE           CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP    PORT(S)        AGE
    kubernetes   ClusterIP      10.96.0.1       <none>         443/TCP        11m
    nginx        LoadBalancer   10.96.148.110   172.19.255.1   80:32326/TCP   9s
    Notice that the nginx service publishes an EXTERNAL-IP.
     Run the curl against the EXTERNAL-IP, for example:
    ```

>     ```bigquery

Reviewer 3: Same comment. I think you can remove "bigquery"

- Retain support of the existing ConfigMap interface for backwards
  compatibility.

## Proposal

Using [Kubebuilder](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder)
framework to build new CRDs "MetalLB" objects and a controllers which will construct
Metallb's Config objects, the Metallb Controller will watch those objects and use
them to configure Metallb.

### Risks and Mitigations

Users need to either use CRD or ConfigMap to configure MetalLB
but not both, if adminstrator mistakenly uses both, the CRD configuration will
overwrite the user defined ConfigMap.

## Design Details

### Design Overview

[Metallb CRD Design diagram](https://excalidraw.com/#json=5697710665498624,2uxfWYNvvkI6IqP-VEaQng)

![Metallb CRD Design diagram](./metallb-crd.png)

There are multiple proposals been discussed during the review of this PR

#### Option1

This proposal will implement the following CRD objects :-

- Node selectors CRD which is a general objects to specify the node(s) of interest

```
node-selector:
    - match-labels:
    - match-expressions:
```    

- Protocol can now be layer2 or bgp but with FRR capability we can add ospf/is-is and other protocols

```

> protocol:

Reviewer 3: I don' understand how this will work. Why would this not be part of the AddressPools object?

> # MetalLB Custom Resource Controller

Reviewer 4: Somewhere in here can you add a link to #196 ?  That's the issue opened a few years ago to track this idea.

Author: it added in the description section of this PR

<!-- toc -->

- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Initial CRD definition](#initial-crd-definition)
- [Testing](#testing)
- [Debugging and Troubleshooting](#debugging-and-troubleshooting)

<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

The purpose of this enhancement is to be able to use kubernetes Custom

> Resource Definition "CRD" to configure MetalLB layer2 and BGP.

Reviewer 4: Can you clarify that the proposal is to support custom resources as an alternative configuration interface?  I don't think we want to drop the existing ConfigMap interface (at least for now).

Something like ...

The purpose of this enhancement is to propose an alternative configuration interface for MetalLB based on Kubernetes Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) while also retaining support for the existing ConfigMap interface.

Author: sure

## Motivation

Today MetalLB allows only configuration of layer2 and BGP protocols using
ConfigMap objects, which is simple from configuration perspective and doesn't

> require cluster-admin rights, however it doesn't have validation on the API

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
require cluster-admin rights. However, it doesn't have validation on the API
```

server level, no support for API versioning and no fine-grained permission
model via RBAC.
Custom resource definition "CRD" takes advantage of kubernetes extensibility
to deliver the automation advantages of cloud services like provisioning,

> scaling and backup/restore.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure how these automation advantages apply to this change from a ConfigMap to CRDs.  Maybe just say that CRDs will provide the benefits you just listed above like API level validation?

Author: this just to explain using CRD enable leverage k8s capabilities let me try to better reword this.

> ### Goals

Reviewer 4: Please also include:

 * Retain support of the existing ConfigMap interface for backwards compatibility

> Configuring MetalLB layer2 and BGP using kubernetes custom resource "CRD"

Reviewer 4: I think throughout this enhancement you can just say "configuring MetalLB" and not include "layer2 and BGP".  I think it can be assumed that all MetalLB configuration should be supported through this interface.

instead of ConfigMap.

## Proposal

> Using SIG's [Kubebuilder](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder)

Reviewer 4: which SIG?  It's in a github org shared by multiple Kubernetes SIGs.  I would specify which SIG owns this, or just refer to kubebuilder on its own.

Author: ok I kept just the reference of kubebuilder

framework to build new CRD "MetalLB" object and a controller which works as
a translator from the user's configuration yaml to a MetalLB's configmap
object, with this approach there will be no changes required for the
MetalLB management plane.

### Risks and Mitigations

> Users need to either use CRD or ConfigMap to provision load balancer instance

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Users need to either use CRD or ConfigMap to configure MetalLB
```

> but not both, if user mistakenly used both the CRD configuration will

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
but not both. If an administrator mistakenly uses both, the CRD configuration will
```

overwrite the user defined ConfigMap.

## Design Details

![Alt text](./metallb_crd.png?raw=true "MetalLB Kubernetes Controller")

1. User will supply the yaml configuration using the MetalLB resource.
1. Configuration will get authenticated and authorized based on RBAC rules.
1. Supplied configuration will get verified using openAPIV3Schema based on
   the definition of MetalLB CRD.
1. New objects will be stored in etcd.
1. MetalLB controller monitors API server looking for creation of MetalLB
   resource.
1. MetalLB controller will use golang based template to convert the configured
   MetalLB object to ConfigMap object.
1. The generated ConfigMap object will be written to etcd so MetalLB's
   components can consume it as if the user directly supplied the ConfigMap
   configuration.

### Initial CRD definition

In this section will share initial metallB custom resource definition which
currently covers only layer2, BGP will be added to the same CRD, or we might

> separate it out and use the same controller to manage both resources.

Reviewer 4: I think we should either mark this as a work-in-progress and complete the full CRD design before merging, or perhaps split this into 2 PRs.  The first PR could include the high level proposal (use CRDs, use kubebuilder, still support the ConfigMap, ...) but not specify the CRD yet.  The 2nd PR could get into the API details after we reach consensus on persuing CRDs in the first place.

I'm interested in what other people think.  I'm interested in getting consensus on the general approach before working too hard on all of the CRD details.

Author: I didn't include the CRD definition originally Mark requested to include, I personally prefer to share it in the next PR with the rest of the code and it will include BGP configuration

Reviewer 3: @russellb I think your suggestion of splitting it makes sense. 1st PR can be a general proposal so we can get consensus on that and the 2nd can be the CRD or a design doc that discusses the CRD.

@msherif1234 My reasoning was that it would be good to agree and merge the CRD as soon as possible and not let development and merging of the full solution hold this up because a) some changes in the CRD may affect the rest of the design and it would avoid any timely rework - although I can't think why that would be the case right now and b) having an agreed and merged CRD may help start other related work earlier if any one is doing any work in parallel.

Author: [WIP CRD PR](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/850), the crd yaml is actually auto generated based on the config data structure which is in sync with what Metallb is using I wanted to make metallb use Metallb config spec so we have only one source .

Note: the current definition includes NodeAffinity configuration which not

> upstream yet, but we have it here for completeness.

Reviewer 4: If you're going to leave that in, I would like to have it in a separate section that gives an illustration of the process of extending it to support new configuration.  I think we should specify what we'd expect to implement and merge by itself, but having a real example of how it would be extended would also be helpful.  That will be important to understand.

Author: that will be doc in the next PR with the rest of the operator code changes
